>>Justin Hensley: So I'm Justin Hensley and
I'm a member of The Office of CTO
at Advanced Macro Devices and my particular area of
research is doing processing on GPUs other than graphics.
So I've been working probably on what is
classically called GPDPU for around 8 or 9 years now.
And just to give you a brief overview
of what I'm going to talk about.
First I want to give you a brief overview of the actual
architecture of the ATI Radeon HD 4870 and how it operates.
So this is at a very high level but it's actually
very important to understand the architecture
that you're developing for because if you want
that last little bit of performance you really need
to understand how the architecture actually operates.
Next I'll talk about what I like to
call spread sheet performance analysis.
So this is just you're doing very quick
back of the envelope analysis and you want
to figure out is an algorithm actually optimal
Is it going to run well on the architecture that
I'm concerned with and if I run an algorithm
or I run a program how close to
what I can really get am I getting.
Then I'll move into some tips and tricks for
the 4870 and finally I'll show a short demo.
So if you look at the spec you'll see this view of
the world that OpenCL has which you have the host
and then you have one or more compute
devices attached to that host.
Each of these compute devices has
some number of compute units
and each of these compute units have
some number of processing elements.
So what I like to do is correlate that to
how the ATI Radeon HD 4870 views theHp world.
So your compute device, that would be the 4870.
So each GPU would correspond to what
OpenCL considers a compute device.
What I'll call a SIMD is what would be the compute unit
in an OpenCL and on the 4870 there areHp 10 of these SIMDs
and then each of these SIMDs has
some number of processing elements.
So on the 4870 there are 64 elements in this
processing elements and we refer to those as wavefronts.
So anytime going forward I'll refer to
this 64 Element long vector if you will
as a wavefront cause that's our internal
nomenclature for what that what that is.
So in reality, so that's the logical view of the GPU, in
reality the 4870, we have 10 SIMDs so we have these 10 sort
of nebulous boxes that are representing the 10 SIMDs on
the hardware but in reality there are 16 Processing "Cores"
and I'm going to call them "Cores"
with quotes there per SIMDs.
So what's happens is if you remember last slide I said there
are 64 Elements in the wavefront well we actually operate 16
at a time of the 4 cycles and that's how we get to
a 64 Element wavefront but they're actually only 16
of these little processors and you just do it over 4 cycles.
Each of these little processing cores actually
has 5 arithmetic logical units per core
and they are basically a very long
instruction word processor.
So we have 5 ALUs and we can issue
what's called a VLIW instruction to all 5
of these ALUs to do 5 operations in parallel.
So if we look at the sort of the GPU at a whole
we have all of these little bitty yellow boxes.
So there are 800 of those so if you
look at the 4870 there areHp 800 ALU's
that every cycle you know you're
ready to give an instruction to.
We have a very large register file and then some fixed
function logic which is what is useful for graphics
but in general you don't access
that when you're using open CL.
That would be something you'd use Open GL for.
Ok so one of the keys of using a GPU such as the
4870 is that you need to recognize the fact that GPUs
or the HD 4870 does not have a large register file or
a large cache instead it has a large register file.
So if you look at traditional CPU optimization
you have this very large cache that you're using
to basically amplify the bandwidth to your memory system.
GPUs in general don't have large caches.
Instead they have very large register files.
And the way we're going to use these large register files
is that we're going to launch more work than available ALU.
So even though I have 800 ALUs at my disposal I'm
going to actually launch more work than is available
than I have actual arithmetic to operate on and what happens
is the register file is partitioned amongst all this work
that I want to do and the 4870 what it can do
is it can switch between all the active things
that can be operating at any one time very fast.
So the goal is that any time something wants a piece of
memory or wants to do an operation that takes a long amount
of time we have a very fast ability to switch
between active wavefronts that are ready to go.
So basically you'll have a wavefront operating on
the ALUs and as soon as it wants to access something
such as memory it gets taken off the ALUs
and another wavefront gets swapped on.
And the whole point of this is that we want
to keep these ALUs as busy as possible.
So we have lots of work that we can
select from and any time somebody wants
to do a long latency operation we just
swap it on the other GPU or onto the 4870.
So to give you an idea of how this looks
pictorially we have let's say we can select between 1
and 4 wavefronts that are going to operate.
So the first wavefront will operate and then at some point
it's going to request something from memory and effectively
that wavefront is going to stall because it
cannot operate until it gets that piece of data.
So let's see we'd have to wait at some point if we
just basically executed this one wavefront we'd have
to wait quite a bit of time till that data
was ready before we could operate again
and our ALUs wouldn't be doing anything.
So what we do in the 4870 is we
actually select another wavefront to run.
So as soon as wavefront 1 stalls we're going to put
wavefront 2 on the ALUs and operate on those guys
and then they'll stall and then as soon as
they stall we'll put wavefront 3 and as soon
as wavefront 3 stalls we'll put wavefront 4.
And the whole point is we're always keeping
the ALUs as busy as possible and as long
as there's the ALUs are busy we're going to be happy.
And you'll notice that by the time
wavefront 4 finishes we can swing back around
and actually operate on wavefront 1 again.
So as long as we have enough ALU operations in flight at
any 1 time we never actually see these latent the fact
that memory takes a very long time to access because
we're just constantly cycling between different pieces
of work that are running on the GPU core.
So now that we have just a very fast sort of overview of
how the GPU gets the performance that it's able to get
or the 4870 gets the performance it gets now I'd like to
talk a little bit about what I call spreadsheet analysis
and the reason it's very valuable to do
this is that it's extremely important
to estimate the performance of your kernels.
So you're writing and OpenCL kernel and you
run it and you get some performance level.
So the question is it might be fast, it might
be extremely fast and you're happy with it
but the real question is how much
performance have I left on the table?
If I look at what the device can do, so what can the
4870 get theoretically and what you're actually getting
with your kernel, you need to be able to estimate and get
a rough idea of how much performance is left on the table.
And to the first order it's actually pretty
simple on the 4870 to do this and that's
because those little processors even though
there's a lot of them they're all in order core
so they basically execute one instruction after another.
There's no out of order reordering going on.
So you can actually fairly easily estimate performance.
So for the HD 4870 to get the Hpfirst order how long
are kernel's going to take is just simply the max
of how long it takes to do the ALU operations,
how long it takes to do what I'll call texture,
but that's just really load store, so what you can
think of is how many addresses can I basically send off
to memory per cycle and how many bytes of
data am I actually reading from memory.
So one of those three things is going to be the thing
that limits your performance because they're all happening
in parallel so all you really care about is how
long did I take to do arithmetic operations?
How long did I take to do those load store operations?
And how much band width did I take?
So to give you an idea of how you would
compute this; let's say we want to figure
out how much time I spent doing ALU operations.
Well it's actually not that hard to compute.
You just take the global size, so how
many elements of computation am I doing?
You multiply that times the number of ALU operations
I'm doing so in this case it's those VLIW instructions.
So this you can basically just look at your
algorithm and sort of give a guesstimate
of how many VLIW instructions would it
take to actually execute this operation.
So it's just how many floating point multiply
floating point multiply ads do you have to do.
So that gives us how much work we have to do.
So we have our global size times the number of instructions.
Well all we need to do is divide that by
how many units of computation we can do.
So we have 10 SIMDs in the 4870 and remember each
SIMD has 16 of these little processors in them
so we multiply a number of SIMDs times the number
of Cores per SIMD and that will give us an idea
of how many items we're doing but then we also have
to take into account how fast is the engine going.
So in this case the 4870 runs at 750 MHz.
So we just take these pieces of information and that'll
give us how much time we spent doing arithmetic operations.
And it turns out when you do this operation
you can get within 95, 96% of reality.
So you could take number of ALU operations your doing, run
it through this formula, and it would come extremely close
to what you're doing when you really
run an algorithm if it's ALU bound.
So if you look online you can find similar information
for number of tex units and how much bandwidth
and so you can create formulas just like that that'll
give you ALU time, texture time or load storage time
and memory time and you just take the maximum of
those and that'll tell you what's your bottleneck.
And the reason you care about that is that if your
memory bandwidth is the thing so you're memory bound
like Andrew was saying earlier, it doesn't make
much sense to actually improve your ALU time
because it still doesn't matter cause you're
spending all your time doing memory operations.
So what are these what are the
practical implications on the 4870?
So if you recall I said the wavefront
size on the 4870 is 64 elements.
So what that means is our workgroup size must be a multiple
of 64 or it shouldd be a multiple for it I should say
because you can think of each of these
wavefronts are sort of a slice of your workgroup.
So you want to make sure that your
workgroup evenly is filled up by wavefronts.
So you would like your wave your
workgroup size to be a multiple of 64.
If you use smaller workgroups than that
you're going to underutilize those SIMDs
because they operate on things of multiples of 64.
One other key thing is that the SIMDs actually operate
on a pair of wavefronts so they operate on an A wavefront
and then a B wavefront and an A
wavefront and then a B wavefront.
What that means is that we have 10 SIMDs.
We have 2 wavefronts that we're operating on
and each of those wavefronts has 64 elements.d
So that means we need a kernel that has if we want to have
1 kernel that fully utilizes the 4870 we need 1,280p elements
or work items on the GPU in that kernel so that
we can fully utilize the GPU with that 1 kernel.
But the key thing here is that we've utilized the 4870
but we haven't actually enabled any latency hiding.
So the key to the GPU is that you can hide
this latency by having more work available
than you actually have computation units for.
So that's means if you want to have minimum latency hiding
on the 4870 you need to have 4 wavefronts in flight.
So in that case it would be 1070s times
4 SIMDps wavefronts, times 64 elements
and that would give you basically 256 or 2560 elements.
So with register usage recall that we we're hiding
this latency by switching between these wavefronts
but the thing is we have limited resource our register
file that has some number of registers that you can use.
So that means if you use more registers that means
there are fewer wavefronts that you can have in flight.
So basically what you can think of is we have this
register file that has some number of elements in it
and we divide it up into some number of wavefronts.
The more registers you use the fewer wavefronts
which means you have worse latency hiding behavior
or the fewer registers you use that
means more wavefronts in flight.
The more things you have to select from
means you have better latency hiding.
So when your coding your algorithms to run on the 4870
you have to consider how many registers am I going to have
to use because the more registers you use that
means the fewer wavefronts that can be on flight.
There is a caveat to that.
You can actually compensate for the
fact that you have a very few wavefronts
in flight by just doing more ALU operations.
If you think back to that diagram where I had the wavefront
1, 2, 3, and 4 operating if that chunk of ALU operations
that are being operated on is longer that means I don't
have to have as many wavefronts in flight to select
from because basically the more ALU instructions you have
operating in one chunk the more latency you can hide.
So another key guideline to writing kernels on the 4870
is that we want to prefer int4 float4 whenever possible.
So recall those little processor
cores are 5 wide VLIW machines.
So at any one instant each of the little cores
can do 5 math operations at any one time.
So we'd like the help the compiler out.
So the compiler can actually extract out ILP from your
kernel and pack those VLIW instructions as much as possible
but you should always help the
compiler out whenever possible.
So by using float4s you're explicitly telling the
compiler hey these things can be operated on in parallel.
Also the memory system is designed to operate
on or to prefer 128 bit loads and stores.
So whenever possible you want to actually load and store
128 bit value so int4 and float4s.
Again these are graphics processors so they
are designed to work on things like XYZW RGBA
so whenever possible it really helps
to give those the compilers a hand
and the memory controllers a hand
in packing the data for it.
Another key thing is to consider the access patterns.
So if your data is stored in a long linear buffer and
you're accessing it consider how you're accessing it
because if you access it in nice sequential
chunks the memory system can easily get
that from the memory system and
treat it back to the shader core.
The problem is if you start striding through memory
at very large offsets what happens is the memory
controller can't coalesce those reads together and we have
to multi-cycle through as we read those values
and you end up getting less bandwidth effectively
out of your memory system because the memory
system really likes these large chunks of memory.
And one other key thing for the 4870 is that AHpMG GPUs have
large register files so there's often a trick where we want
to do more work per element and I'll
give an example later but the one thing
to consider is there is local N OpenCL there is
local memory which is faster than local memory
but there's actually something that's faster than local
memory and that would be the registers in the shader core.
So whenever possible you'll want to use those.
So you can compensate or you can actually
optimize your programs by using more registers
because we have this large pool of
registers available on the 4870.
So a quick example of some OpenCL code or quick
optimization let's look at median filtering.
So median filtering is just a non-linear filter for removing
one shot noise so it's a filter where you sort pixels
in a neighborhood around yourself you
find the median and you output that
and what that does is it gets rid of speckles for images.
So simple algorithm is just to load the neighborhood,
you sort the pixels and then you output the median value.
So if you look at some OpenCL code here the
first thing we're going to do is we're going
to compute some indices based on global ID.
We're going to handle our edge cases with an
init statement so we are on the boarder of image,
then we're going to load our neighborhood.
So here I'm just loading 9 values from a
buffer that I passed in which is a uint buffer.
So I load those 4 values and then we're
going to basically sort along the rows.
So this is a very efficient way of doing the
median filler so if you sort the rows of the 9x9
or 3X3 neighborhood then you sort along the
columns, it turns out if you just sort the diagonal,
that middle value on the diagonal is the median.
So this kernel loads 9 values, does this sort and then
outputs a value and you know it's just a simple kernel
that will output a median and it's
actually fairly efficient.
So here's some of the example auxiliary
functions so you can I'll just skip through these
because they're basic C code OpenCL code.
So another way of doing this is to do more
work per work item and the key to this is
that we want to prefer 128 bit loads and stores.
So the way we can do this is actually
compute more than one output per work item.
So the better algorithm for the 4870
is to loaHpd a neighborhood of 8x3.
So instead of loading a 3x3 we're going to load an
8x3 and we do that via 6 and 4 loads or uint 4 loads.
So we're going to load 2 values for the top row, 2
values for the middle row, 2 values for the bottom row.
We're going to sort pixels for each
of the 4 sort for each of the 4 pixels
that we're going to output and then output only 4 values.
So we actually you'll notice we're actually loading
extra data here that we don't really need but it turns
out even though we're loading extra data and
we're not changing how we're doing the algorithm
at all it's actually just 20% faster just to do
this because you're giving the memory system a hand
and having it load these 128 bit values
instead of having these 3-32 bit values.
So the way this works is again we compute some
indices, we load the row above us through 2 loads,
our row through 2 loads, the row below
us by 2 loads and then we're going
to find the 4 medians and then we'll output it.
And you notice one trick I'm doing here is
I'm actually casting my memory from uint 4
so that I can get a aligned uint or 128 bit load
and you'll also notice I'm not actually doing any
other optimizations as far as how much work I'm doing.
I just basically load this larger window, do
the same amount of work and output 4 values just
by changing how I access the memory system you
can actually improve performance by quite a bit.
Ok, so now I'm going to move on to a quick demo.
So this is a demo called Powdertoy which
is a mixed fluid/particle simulation
and by that I mean you have particles that effect
fluid state so you can have some things such as fire
and fire will heat up the air increase pressure and by
increasing pressure you get a nice little flow of particles
and so the fluid state will affect the particle motion
and the particle state affects how the fluid flows.
So before we get into that I just want to show the
original C code is on the left so I actually reported one
of our engineers wrote this as a personal project in
just simple C and then one weekend I was at a coffee shop
for two hours I converted that to OpenCL.
So it literally took maybe an hour to two hours to
convert this from the original C code to OpenCL.
So on the left for part of the fluid simulation you'll see
the original C code and on the right is the OpenCL kernel
and you'll see that they're really similar except for the
part of the top where I'm having to compute my indices
but that's you know the actual core of
the computation is actually very similar
to what you would write in the original C code.
So we see here is this we have this particles
that are made of like wood and it's on fire.
So they're burning, the wood's burning and
then we'll hit some energetic particles there
which we'll do some energetic things and at the bottom we
have a fuel source; so it's just basically gas particles
that are kind of floating around and been browning
in motion and we get this nice you know fire going
and then you'll notice in the background we get
this green which denotes high pressure regions
so the background is the pressure of the simulation and
because we have increased pressure where the heat sources,
at the bottom get this nice outflow of particles
and then we can come in and I want to select some.
So this is oil basically so I can select oil and ignite
the oil and get some nice little particles flowing around.
So at work we typically call this productivity tool because
you end up wasting a lot of time just you know just sort
of doodling around with it because it's just fun to watch.
So and this one I note that was running on there's a
behind here there's a Mac Pro with an HD4870 sitting inside
so that was running on the GPU or the HD 4870 in OpenCL
doing all that and then there's OpenGL for the rendering.
Ok so some quick conclusions.
Unfortunately I can't tell you a
silver bullet for optimization.
It's a balancing act so you have to consider
several things when you are doing this.
You have to consider your registry usage.
How many wavefronts are in flight at any one time?
You have to consider your ALU to memory access ratio.
Sometimes it's actually better to recompute something
because the 4870 has a lot of ALUs at your disposal
so there are times when it's actually better just
to recompute something than to fetch it from memory.
Also remember that the work group size should be a multiple
of 64 and if you wdant to have any kind of latency hiding
for a single kernel you need at least
2,500 elements in flight at any one time.
Actually you'd ideally want even more than that but at a
minimum so you do not want to write a kernel that is a 1x 1
in the loop that loops over a million things
and expect the 4870 to be able top run that fast
because it wants parallel you know not long sequential runs.
So with that I'd like to introduce Boaz from Intel.
>> Boaz Ouriel: My name is Boaz Ouriel and
I'm a software engineer working at Intel.
I came all the way from Israel to give you this
presentation and in the next 20 minutes I would like to talk
about how you could take your own OpenCL
code and actually optimize it for Intel CPUs.
I'm going to base this discussion on a case study
which I've performed prior to my arrival to the US
where I've taken a couple of algorithms
and ported them to OpenCL and what I would
like to show you is how I optimized those
kernels and actually show you the results
and how I analyzed them using Shark which is Apple's
profiling utility and also give you an incentive
of what were the kind of things I had to do in order to get
my codes more optimal; so that you can do the same thing
when you are going to optimize your code
when you're writing it for Intel CPUs.
Based on these results I'm going to give you a check list
of DOs and DON'Ts that you can take with you back home
and when you're writing your own OpenCL code what you
want to be optimal for Intel CPUs you can actually use it.
The presentation is going to focus mostly on kernel writing
but I am going to discuss a little about what you should do
on the whole side as well and at the end I'm going
to show you a short demo of the work I've done.
So I want to start off by asking
why write OpenCL for the CPU.
So today when you want to write an efficient application
for Intel CPUs you really have to think about 2 things.
The first thing is how are you going to spread
your work across the cores to get the benefits
out of the multicore architecture and the second thing you
want to think is how are you going to vectorize your work
so that you could get the vector units which
reside on Intel CPUs and get them working.
Failing to do that will result in inefficient code
and today when you're writing your application in C
or C ++ there is quite a lot of boiler
plate code which you need to write just
to get the benefits out of the multicore architecture.
Things like thread classes, wrappers, task, job queues,
thread pools and there's and this requires a lot
of time and a lot of debugging and tuning.
And in addition to that you need to ramp yourself
on the intrinsics to get the vector units to work
and by the way the this means that when OpenCL
comes in it really helps the developer a lot.
It provides a set of run time APIs which will allow
him to seamlessly spread his work across the cores
and get the benefits out of the multicore architecture
and this is very effective for both data parallelism.
This has been mentioned quite a lot of time during
the presentations but it is also very effective
for task parallelism; so taking your
serial bits importing them to OpenCL.
This will work absolutely great on Intel CPUs.
And in addition to that the language introduces the high
level syntax which allow you, and I will show that later on,
to get the benefits out of the vector units.
So the code is now going to be very readable, very easy
to ramp on and you're going to have a really easier time
on maintaining it and this code is going to be portable
not only across devices but it is also going to be portable
across device generation and that is very important.
What I'm going to show you also is that actually
you're your code is not that difficult to optimize
because you have Shark to use it
and help you with this process.
So let's start by introducing the case study where and
as I've mentioned I've taken a couple of algorithms
and those algorithms come from the video processing domain.
The first algorithm is color enhancements where one
can manipulate the saturation of individual colors
of video frames and the other one is a
contrast enhancement which will allow you
to manipulate the brightness of incoming video frames.
Both of these algorithms are very parallel
meaning that each pixel can be rendered by itself.
However the contrast enhancement contains a serial
part which I have imported to OpenCL as well
and I'm executing it using task parallelism.
The input for those kernels are video frames and they are
represented in YUV 4:2:0 color space which is a planar
and this means that the layout of those
frames is actually a structure of rays
which is great for fetching data into the vector units.
All of the video processing is
done through fixed point arithmetic
and both of those algorithms can actually run together
since they're addressing different components of the pixel.
Each pixel is represented by 3
components which is represented in 10 bits
and contained inside unsigned short.
So potentially you can load 8 pixels into
the 128 bit registers of our vector units.
So I want to start by showing you how you can use Shark
to optimize your OpenCL code when
you're writing it for the CPU.
My assumption is that you are already acquainted with the
how to use Shark and after you sample it this is the window
that is going to come up and it's going to give you a
breakdown of the functions and how much time each one
of them consumed from your execution, from your total
execution time, and you're actually looking for a line
which says unknown library; mystic, but
unknown library is actually your OpenCL kernel
and in this case you can actually see that it
consumed 22% out of your total execution time.
You double click on it and another window opens; don't be
scared, this is only assembly code and you really don't need
to know everything about what's going on there.
The only thing you want to do is
get yourself oriented in the codes.
You are looking for markers that will help you correlate
what you're seeing in assembly to the things that happen
on your source code and in this case
there was a 4 loop which I marked for you
and this really helped me understand
what was going on in my kernel
and correlate the lines of assembly to the source code.
And if you do decide that you go
and want to go into the adventure
of understanding what the certain instruction
does there is there is always the way of doing it
by highlighting the instruction and then pressing the
Ask Some Help button which will open the documentation
for this instruction taken directly
from Intel's Manual of Instructions
and you can read all about it and
learn exactly what it does.
But what you're really looking for inside
this window is actually the hot spots.
Why the hot spots?
Because the hot spots are your candidates
for the next optimization and the process
of optimizing your code is actually an iterative process
where you start looking for hotspots, you optimize them
and then the next one will pop-up and this process is
going to be very iterative and you decide when to stop it
and what I did during my smaller case study is exactly that.
So let's review together the optimization steps I took.
So I started off by writing a very naive scholar fragmented
version of those kernels and when I say fragmented I mean
that each kernel was capable of processing a
single pixel at the time, not more than that,
and I chose on the host side the number of work items to
be equal to the number of pixels within the video frame;
and just a side comment the current CPU device
implementation restricts you to a workgroup size of one,
so actually your workgroups are
equal to the number of work items.
So this was my base version which I
used and I called it Scalar Fragmented.
The next thing I wanted to understand or evaluate was
how much overhead was the run time actually introducing
switching when switching between work items.
So I wrote another version which I call the Scalar version
and in this version what I did I modified the kernels only
a bit, I added a 4 loop inside so that I can process more
than a single pixel at the time and on the host side I
changed the number of work items to be equal to the number
of cores and this can be easily done
using the runtime APIs of OpenCL
so you can actually know exactly how many cores you have
in that system at that current moment and this means
that for example if you're running on a Dual Core
machine then actually you'd have 2 work items
and each work item is going to process half of the frame
and this is this is an interesting experiment and I got 10%
out of that over the in comparison
to this Scalar Fragmented version.
The next thing I wanted to see was whether the compiler of
OpenCL was actually taking my scalar code and turning it
into vector instruction, SCC instruction, so
that my vector units are going to be active.
So I looked at the codes using Shark and
I saw that everything was color there
so what I did was write another version
which I call the vectorized version
and what I did I used the OpenCL vector primitives,
used ushort 8 and ushort Shark 16, no intrinsics here,
only OpenCL syntax, and I was hoping to get
the compiler to produce SSE instructions.
So I recompiled it and I took another look at the
code and yes jackpot it was getting vectorized.
So I ran a measurement and I got an
additional 40% versus the @scalar version.
Are you pleased?
I'm not. I was expecting to get a bit
more out of the vectorized version.
So I ran Shark again and I saw that there was
a hotspot and this hotspot really correlated
to a certain operation I was performing in my source code
and that operation was actually
dynamically accessing vector components.
So when I say dynamically accessing think of a variable
J for example which is currently containing an index
to which you want to access with the vector and this is what
I was doing I was accessing using J and this generated a lot
of SSE code which was very inefficient and
luckily for me in this example I was capable
of replacing these accesses these
dynamical accesses with contents.
So it was kind of redundant in my case.
So I wrote another version which I called Indexing
Vectors Using Constants, sorry for the long name
but I couldn't think of another one, and replace those
variable indexing views and instead used constants
and here I really got an additional
189% over the vectorized version.
Great! This this is starting to look like
the numbers I was looking for initially.
The last thing I did was actually take a small loop,
a 4 loop which was which had the constant
number of iterations and unroll it.
I saw that the compiler was not doing it by itself
I wanted to see whether unrolling it will help me.
So I wrote another version on top
of the on top of the previous one
where I was unrolling the this
loop and I got an additional 23%.
So now I took another look at the at the
results Shark produced and what I saw is
that the kernel it was pretty well balanced.
I mean there were no outstanding
issues that I could reoptimize.
Of course I could always take the path as was
said previously of choosing a different algorithm
but this code seemed pretty well balanced.
So I decided to stop my optimizations and
actually took a shot at writing the same,
the same application using SSE and multithreading in C.
So I was using pthreads and I was using intrinsics;
I combined those 2 and I did a comparison
and I call this version the Hand Tuned
version and this was very interesting.
I was actually only 5% behind the SSE version.
So that's very very good.
In this example I was on par with my OpenCL version
and the optimization phases I took were fairly simple.
It really took me no more than a day to get to that point.
So if we look at what happened here I started off with
a very naive version this Scalar Fragmented which was
like 5 1/2 times slower than the final
version and I was able to get to be almost
on par in comparison to the Hand Tuned version.
So now together let's build this check list
of DOs and DON'Ts so that you can use it
when you're getting back to your offices.
The first thing you want to do is
actually match your match your work groups
to the number of cores and not do oversubscription.
As we've seen here is is actually worth an
additional 10% of your work and remember
that you are restricted to a workgroup size of one.
Vectorizing your code is extremely important.
If you do not do that you are leaving a lot
of performance on the table but remember
that indexing vectors using variables or dynamical
accesses is going to hurt so try avoiding those,
those accesses and try using constants instead.
And if this is not possible and not always is it possible
then you're better off loading this using a V load built
in command of the OpenCL language and load
it into memory and do your work scalarly
and then return it back to a vector using a V store.
I've measured that as well and
it produces very good numbers.
You're better off not using not using dynamical accesses.
And notice also that the accessor methods
for vectors, things like high, low, odd,
even all of those operators actually hide beneath
them accesses to components within the vectors
and these are not very efficient
today so try using these moderately.
Think twice before you do that.
Loop and rolling can help especially
if you have small loops.
And in addition to that there are a couple of other
things which I didn't show in the previous slides
but are worth taking a shot at is the use
of prefetches for example if you have a loop
and you're prefetching data you can actually prefetch
the data for the next iteration or the one after it.
This might help, I've seen it I've seen
it help from and it was worth around 10%.
Duals are better than 4 loops because it will save you
an extra branch and this is also worth around 3 to 4 %.
So now before I conclude I would like to
show you a quick demo of the work I made.
[ Background sounds ]
>> Boaz Ouriel: So I've written a simple player
that illustrates the algorithms I was talking about
and here are some flowers that my wife took while she
was in Netherlands, very nice flowers and I am going
to show you how I am going to play with different
features, things like the saturation of colors.
I can actually decrease the brightness or
increase the brightness of those video frames.
I can remove components.
Let's say I remove the green and now the
blue and let's leave just the yellow parts
and now let's return everything back to normal.
But this is not very impressive anybody can do that but
wait on, there's a lot more going on rendering-wise.
All of this was happening in the background and
all of this is running on my dual core machine
at 2.4 GHz and I can still manipulate stuff.
I mean I can raise, I can reduce the saturation,
I can remove the reds and return it and now I want
to switch into what I call a benchmark mode.
The rendering is going to freeze but don't
worry this is not a bug, this is intended.
And now notice here that I have a frame rate count, let's
move and have everything focused on this and you can see
that I'm currently using the very inefficient version
I initially wrote and things are running around 140,
150 frames per second and I'm going to switch
to my optimized version, the final version
and actually now I'm running at 800 frames per
second which is around 5, 5 point something X better
than the initial version and we can switch back into
playback mode and enjoy ourselves with soothing video.
[ Applause ]
>> Boaz Ouriel: Thank you.
Ok so I want to conclude.
OpenCL is a very good framework to harness Intel CPUs.
The syntax is very intuitive and easy to ramp and
it will be very easy for you to maintain the code.
And if you follow the steps which I've shown you you're
actually going to get pretty efficient code for Intel CPUs.
It will scale well across the cores.
It will use your vectoring units on the CPUs
and you can use serial parts to run on the CPU
because they will work just fine using task parallelism.
The code is going to be portable and it's
going to be portable across device generations
so you will write your code once and you
will enjoy the goodness of future platforms.
Thank you for your time.
I would like to invite Chris from NVIDIA.
>> Chris Lamb: Hi my name is Chris Lamb and I'm the manager
for OpenCl at NVIDIA and I'd like to talk to you today
about what it takes to optimize your OpenCL
programs to run excellently on NVIDIA GPU's.
Here's a quick outline of what
I'd like to talk about with you.
First I'm going to go through the hardware motivation
for what we're going to do talk about today.
Then a set of memory optimizations you might consider doing.
Secondly a set of execution configuration
optimizations, this is about how you map your work
onto the OpenCL execution model and then finally in the
optimization instructions this is what you might think
about doing inside a single work item or thread you
might think of it sort of similar on our architecture;
a single work item how you might write the
code in there and do instruction optimizations
to get the best performance out of the system.
Finally I'll conclude with a quick demo.
Go back. Can we go back?
Takes a bit.
Slow. Here we go.
So this is an overview of our top
of the line 10-series Architecture.
This is what you'll find today in the GTX
285 and the FX 4800 available for the Mac.
It has 240 scalar processors each of these execute threads
or work items in OpenCL in independent thread of execution.
These 240 scalar processors are configured as 30
separate stre0aming multiprocessors in the hardware.
Each of these is in the OpenCL term a compute unit in the
execution model or the abstract hardware model for OpenCL.
Each of these streaming multiprocessors contains a grouping
of eight scalar processors, two special function units
and one double precision unit on the latest
10 series Architectures 285 and the FX 4800.
As well as a local memory that enables work
item cooperation and very fast access to data.
So what does it take in general
to optimize for this architecture?
The high level is you want to maximize
independent parallelism
You want to think big.
You want to maximize the arithmetic intensity, that's
the math to bandwidth ratio of individual work items.
Sometimes it's better to recompute than to cache so you
want to think about where you're getting your data from.
The GPU sends it transistors; the video GPUs spend
their transistors on ALUs, not memory, not cache;
we spend it on compute units and so unlike a CPU where
you're thinking about a cache hierarchy that's meant
to amplify bandwidth on video GPUs you want to
think about maximizing parallel and hiding latency.
You want to try and do more computation
on the GPU to avoid costly data transfers.
This is an accelerator that's typically over a
very fast PCIE bus with the ratio of bandwidth
of the local memory that's on the device, on the board there
compared to going over the bus is going to be a big step
and so you want to think about actually moving more
computation to the device than might sort of naturally fit
in a parallel way because often even
with low parallelism tasks you'll find
that though they may execute even slightly slower
on the GPU you'll avoid a costly data transfer
that might actually cost you more performance in the end.
And so moving more tasks to the GPU can
actually help your overall performance.
So here's some memory optimizations you might
think about when designing your algorithm.
The probably first order affector on
performance for the GPUs is going to be thinking
about coalesced versus non-coalesced memory accesses.
This can be an order of magnitude in
performance differential and what does this mean?
This means the access pattern in memory of
sequentially numbered work items in a work group.
You want to think about whether those work items are
generally accessing the same area of memory or not.
The fastest accesses are going to be when their
accessing sequential accessing memory sequentially.
But even if you're you're generally accessing
within a similar region of space on the latest
in video GPUs you'll get very close to
peak performance out of memory sub system.
You want to optimize for spatial locality
of accesses in cache texture memory.
This is when you're using OpenCL
images to operate on image data.
Images may benefit from processing in 2D blocks
because this is how the graphics hardware,
the fix function hardware that's there in GPUs to make these
operations go really fast, this is the kind of operation
that it's optimized for, this 2D block localit-y.
So you may think about how you map your data onto your work
groups and work items so that you take advantage of that.
You generally want to experiment with the aspect
ratio of the work items to see what performs best
for your given algorithm and access pattern.
Another important thing is to let the OpenCL
run time allocate your memory for you.
This means using the CL_MEM_ALLOC host pointer
flag if you want host accessible memory.
Implementation can optimize the alignment and
the location of memory and generally set it
up in a way that's most optimal for high
performance processing on the device.
Without actually giving up a huge amount of control you can
still map that memory and get a direct host pointer to it
that allows it to manipulate it with
with normal C++ Objective C code.
You want to take advantage of local memory.
So this is another first order
effect on performance for video GPUs.
The local memory is generally 100s
of times faster than global memory.
Several 100, 750 or so gigabytPes per second on the latest
part so it's huge in terms of its raw memory bandwidth
and it's actually about as fast as registers when
you're thinking about balancing your algorithm.
Work items can also cooperate within a work group via
local memory and this is actually a really powerful thing
because with the barrier operation and the local mem
fence you can actually share data between work items
in the work group with very low
latency and very high bandwidth.
You can also use it as a technique
to avoid noncoalesced access.
So if you generally know you're going to have a more
randomized access pattern but there's a larger scale
of granularity that you can find some coherence on.
You can load whole sections of data into
the local memory staging it in there
and then performing the more randomized
access on the local memory
that is very fast and can optimize for that case on ship.
When you do this if you start depending on this in
a large way you may find that you get slowdowns due
to bank conflicts when high randomization of
access patterns occur into the local memory
and generally this is a far second of order of facts to
staging and getting coalescing of loads to global memory.
But if you end up finding that you
might think that you're running
into this there are optimization guides
to help you go and tweak this code.
Next I'd like to talk about some
execution configuration optimizations.
A key to getting the most out of a whole line of NVIDIA
GPU's because the NVIDIA GPUs from the top end GX285
and FX 4800 through the GPUs, the embedded GPUs
that are in the Mac mini and the white MacBook.
They're all compute capable and you really want
to scale across the whole range of products.
So you want to think about partitioning your computation
to keep all these different types of GPUs busy.
This means you want to think really big.
Many work items, many workgroups.
In general you want to think about mapping you
know what would be the most inter loop of your code
to a single work item to try and get as
much independent parallelism as possible.
A good rule of thumb is to think about the top end
process you're targeting and have workgroups much,
much greater in number than the number of compute units;
that 's the number of streaming
multi-processors that is on that top end device.
You also want to think about the
resource usage per thread and tune that so
that you can fit a lot of them on the device.
Things like local memory and the registers used for work
item all trade off in terms of the number of work items
that you can actually fit on a given
streaming multiprocessor and you want to try
and tune that so you can fit enough of them on the streaming
multiprocessor to keep the GPU busy and hide latencies.
There's a number of performance guides that are
available through NVIDIA to help you tune these.
There's some spreadsheets as well as documents to help you
analyze your algorithm as you begin the design process.
Finally some instruction optimizations: A key differentiator
is that NVIDIA GPUs have a scalar architecture
that means they they they work fine on one piece of data.
A key implication from when writing
OpenCL programs is that using vector types
for OpenCL on video GPUs is mostly a convenience.
It's not going to get you extra performance.
In fact sometimes it may actually hurt
performance because you'll reduce the amount
of parallelism available to the architecture.
The architecture will actually take your scalar work
and auto-vectorize it and try to get the most both
out of the ALUs and the memory sub system.
So you generally want to prioritize more work items and more
workgroups rather than ganging up more work per work item
or auto or manually vectorizing your code.
You definitely want to think about
maximizing use of high bandwidth memory.
So maximizing the use of local memory,
minimizing accesses to global memory
and maximizing the coalescing of global memory accesses.
So definitely try and think of the tradeoff and the
order in which these accesses happen in your program;
where you're going to be thinking about
hiding latency versus where you're going
to be using very close, very fast resources.
You also want to think about optimizing
performance by overlapping memory accesses
with hardware complication inside a single work item.
You need to sort of think about phases of computation
where you might load data and then operate on it
because the the ideal cases you have many,
many work items available for the hardware
to schedule it can actually choose ones that
have a phase of heavy computation while a number
of other work items are busy going getting data
from a high latency memory like global memory.
So high arithmetic intensity programs, the
high ratio of math to memory transactions,
are generally going to be very well
performing and you you want to focus
on keeping as many current work items as possible.
You also want to think about the math library
you're using and the compiler options you're using.
So using native and half math functions where
possible can get you enormous speed ups.
Many have a direct mapping onto the hardware
ISA and these can be orders of magnitudes faster
than higher precision the higher precision native variance
or sorry the higher precision math library of variance
and typically with very good accuracy as well.
Note that these half functions are the type that
operates at half precision not on the half size types.
You also want to try and use the
CL mad enable compiler option.
The FMAD hardware that does fuse multiply additions
to be mapped to a direct hardware instruction
so you can actually coalesce A+B times C into a very
fast operation that happens in a single instruction.
There is some trade off with accuracy but in general
most developers have found that the accuracy is
by far good enough for their for their
applications including some scientific ones.
You also want to investigate using even more aggressive
options if you can the CL-fast-relaxed math compiler option
which enables many aggressive compiler optimizations.
Now I'd like to talk a little bit
about the demo I'm going to show you.
So this is a demo of cinematic quality
ocean surface simulation using the GPU.
The algorithm is one based on wave composition where
the ocean surface is composed of enormous simple waves.
Each sine wave is a hybrid sine wave that is sort
of a 2 dimensional sine wave called a Gerstner wave
where a match point on the surface is
actually rotating in a circular motion.
This is actually exactly what happens to a sort of
a water particle in a sea surface wave in real life.
It's based on Jerry Tenssendorf's paper
"Simulating Ocean Water" which is statistics based,
that means it's not a physical
simulation; it's meant to look very real
by approximating what what would actually be
happening with the dynamics of the system.
It generates a wave distribution in the
frequency domain and then performs an inverse FFT
to get the physical geometry for the waves.
This technique is already been widely used in movie
CGI since the 1990s and games since the 2000s.
In general movie CGI size of the height map is very, very
large, 2 K x 2 K is very common for a number of these movies
that are quite popular that feature water centrally.
In games the size of the height mount
has generally had to been quite small.
Crysis had 64 x 64, Resistance too had 32 x 32
and all of these the simulation has been done
on the CPU or Cell SPE in a game console.
So what's been limiting the cinematic quality
has actually been a performance issue.
The simulation required to generate the displacement map
is needed to be done in real time and computing the FFT
on CPU becomes a bottleneck when
displacement map gets larger.
Larger texture also takes longer to
transfer from the CPU over the bus
to the GPU leading to another performance bottleneck there.
However, the large displacement map is
a must have for detailed wave crafts
that I'll show you on a close up later in the demo.
Fortunately GPU computing NVIDIA GPUs are
really really great at doing these FFTs.
Multiple 512 x 512 or even 1 k x 1 k transforms
can be done in real time on modern GPUs.
So now I'd like to go ahead and show you the demo.
So here we have in real time the water being being
rendered and simulated on the same GTX 285 GPU.
All the data is staying on the GPU.
The simulation is being directly handed over the
ravder [assumed spelling] ring by a GL interop
which is a really great way if you're
doing games or you want to present stuff.
If you want to use the GP to its fullest because you
don't have to go back across the bus to the host memory.
So here we can see that we've got nice
specular, we've got nice highlights of the waves.
We can go down really close here and here's what
I was talking about those detailed wave crests.
You can see how there's really
fine detail on the waves here.
You wouldn't get that with a lower quality height
map because they'd be smoothed out by the algorithm.
[ Background sounds ]
>> Chris Lamb: Very pretty.
[Applause] Thank you.
That concludes my talk
[ Applause ]
>> Thank you Chris.
OK folks let me just start by thanking
our our guest speakers today.
So Chris, Boaz and Justin and also earlier today Andrew.
Thank you all for for joining us today and your work
on these sessions we really appreciate it so thank you.
[Applause]